Created using advanced configs (infra) (#642)
canonical/checkbox: docs/tutorial/using-checkbox/advanced-config.rst

.. _advanced_configs:

.. todo::

   Replace smoke -> tutorial

===============

> Advanced Config

Reviewer: Having read the material, I agree with @pieqq : this is not a tutorial, but a series of short howtos. Analogous to for example the series of "Manage ..." how-tos under https://juju.is/docs/juju/how-to for juju.

===============

This section of the tutorial documents some useful configuration that are commonly
found in the wild. This is by no means a complete list of all possible items that
one can find in a configuration. Refer to the :ref:`launcher` section for more.

Transport and Report
====================

> Checkbox allows a configuration to specify how the test report should be represented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Checkbox allows a configuration to specify how the test report should be represented and where each representation should be output.
```

> One usage of this feature is to output the final report to ``stdout`` in text form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One use case for this is outputting the final report to ``stdout`` in text form.
```

Create a launcher like the following:

.. code-block:: none

  [test plan]
  unit = com.canonical.certification::smoke
  forced = yes

  [test selection]
  forced = yes

  # note what comes after ":" is the name of the exporter
  [exporter:text]
  # this specific one exports text,
  # you can also try com.canonical.plainbox::html
  unit = com.canonical.plainbox::text

  # similarly, what comes after ":" is the name of the transport
  [transport:out_to_stdout]
  # standard out, you can also try "stderr" for standard error
  stream = stdout
  type = stream

  # also here, : delimits the name of the section
  # this section tells Checkbox that we want a custom report
  [report:screen]
  # we used the exporter we defined before (by using its name)
  exporter = text
  # and we use the transport we defined as well
  transport = out_to_stdout

> Launch Checkbox, it should print a human readable output to the stream you chose!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you now launch Checkbox it prints a human readable output to the stream you chose!
```

It may be tempting to redirect this output to file manually, but it is possible to
save it in a file using the same mechanism. Try the following launcher for
instance to create a beautiful html report to a file:

.. code-block:: none

  [test plan]
  unit = com.canonical.certification::smoke
  forced = yes

  [test selection]
  forced = yes

  [exporter:html]
  unit = com.canonical.plainbox::html

  [transport:out_to_file]
  type = file
  path = /tmp/output.html

  [report:file_report]
  exporter = html
  transport = out_to_file
  # This tells Checkbox to always produce this report
  # without asking any confirmation
  forced = yes

Launch Checkbox, you should now have an html report to check out in
``/tmp/output.html``.

Of course you can have multiple exporters, as mentioned before, try the following
launcher, it will produce one html report and two (equal) textual reports.

.. code-block:: none

  [test plan]
  unit = com.canonical.certification::smoke
  forced = yes

  [test selection]
  forced = yes

  [exporter:text]
  unit = com.canonical.plainbox::text

  [transport:out_to_file1]
  type = file
  path = /tmp/upload.txt

  [transport:out_to_file2]
  type = file

>   path = ~/.last_result.txt

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a comment to explain Checkbox can use stuff like `~` for current user directory? It might not be obvious what `~` represents (I'm not sure who our audience is on these tutorials...)

Author: well I think that the technical level is a bit higher than that, how can someone use checkbox if they do not know the basics of linux

  [transport:out_to_file]
  type = file
  path = /tmp/upload.html

  [exporter:html]
  unit = com.canonical.plainbox::html

  [report:file_1]
  exporter = text
  transport = out_to_file1
  forced = yes

  [report:file_2]
  exporter = text
  transport = out_to_file2
  forced = yes

  [report:html_report]
  exporter = html
  transport = out_to_file
  forced = yes

.. note::

  If you start Checkbox with this launcher, remember to remove ``~/.last_result.txt``

>   you may not want it to be there

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this note.

  to remove it after this experiment.

> UI Verbosity

Reviewer: Please split this into a separate howto.

==============

> Sometimes we may want more to know more on the tests that are executing, sometimes

Reviewer 2: I think something's weird with that sentence. I guess "want more" can be removed.

Author: yup I rewritten the phrase but forgot a piece of the old one there

> we may only care about the results. Checkbox allows you to customize how much

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we may only care about the results. To customise how much
```

> output is produced while running via two mechanisms ``ui.output``

Reviewer 2: Add a `:` after `mechanisms`.

and ``ui.verbosity``.

> For example, consider the following launcher, when resource jobs are plenty the

Reviewer 2: I would rewrite this as:

> For example, consider the following launcher. When resource jobs are plenty, the ...

standard output may fill up with their output and we may not want to read it.

.. code:: none

  [test plan]
  unit = com.canonical.certification::smoke
  forced = yes

  [test selection]
  forced = yes

  [ui]
  output = hide-resource-and-attachment

> Similarly, we may not want to see the standard output of automatic jobs, we can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, we may not want to see the standard output of automatic jobs. We can
```

> obtain that with the following launcher:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
achieve that with the following launcher:
```

.. code:: none

  [test plan]
  unit = com.canonical.certification::smoke
  forced = yes

  [test selection]
  forced = yes

  [ui]
  # This also hides resource and attachments, they are automated as well!
  output = hide-automated

> We can also obtain the opposite result, sometimes we may want to have as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also obtain the opposite result: sometimes we may want to have as
```

> much information possible about a Checkbox execution, for example, we may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
much information possible about a Checkbox execution. For example, we may
```

> want to read when a job is started. Check out the following launcher to get that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
want to read when a job is started. The following launcher accomplishes that:
```

.. code:: none

  [test plan]
  unit = com.canonical.certification::smoke
  forced = yes

  [test selection]
  forced = yes

  [ui]
  # Also, `debug` is available
  verbosity = verbose

> Auto-Retrying Failing Tests

Reviewer: Please split into a separate howto

===========================

> Checkbox is able to automatically retry failing jobs, try to use the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Checkbox is able to automatically retry failing jobs. Use the following
```

launcher to see how this is done.

.. code:: none

  [test plan]
  unit = com.canonical.certification::smoke
  forced = yes

  [test selection]
  forced = yes

  [ui]
  auto_retry = yes
  max_attempts = 2
  # the delay is in seconds
  delay_before_retry = 2

> As you may have noticed, once every test was executed, all failing tests were

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After every test was executed, all failing tests were
```

retried up to two times, waiting a few seconds between one attempt and the next.

> This may be very useful if, for example, a test relies on an external factor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This may be useful if, for example, a test relies on an external factor
```

> like, for example, WiFi access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
like WiFi access.
```

> Config Renaming

Reviewer: Please split into a separate howto

===============

> Checkbox, by default, always calls its configs as ``checkbox.conf`` and always

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default configuration filename Checkbox looks for is `checkbox.conf`. The config file is always
```

looks for them in the same three places. This may be an issue when one wants to
store and use multiple configurations on the same machine.

Lets try to make Checkbox load a new configuration from a different location and

> with a different name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

First, create the following config in ``/tmp/my_config_name.conf``

.. code:: none

   [test plan]
   unit = com.canonical.certification::smoke
   forced = yes

   [test selection]
   forced = yes

Also, just to be sure that this works, lets create a standard
``~/.config/checkbox.conf`` config that does not do what we want

.. code:: none

   [test plan]
   unit = wrong_name

Then create the following launcher and call Checkbox with it.

.. code:: none

   [config]
   config_filename = /tmp/my_config_name.conf

As you can see the correct file was loaded, as the other one would have
risen an error. The ``config_filename`` can also be just a name. To try this
modify the previous launcher by removing ``/tmp/`` and move the
``my_config_name.conf`` to ``~/.config``. Launch Checkbox and see, you should
obtain the same result.

> Config Inheritance

Reviewer: Please split into a separate howto

==================

Config renaming is useful, but sometimes it is not enough to maintain a clean

> setup. One thing that it common is wanting a basic configuration of Checkbox

Reviewer 3: Do you mean "One thing that is common"?

Author: ops, yess
